so most of you can probably relate to
what I'm feeling right now my heart is
racing in my chest my palms are a little
bit clammy I'm sweating and my breast is
a little bit shallow now these familiar
sensations are obviously the result of
standing up in front of a thousand of
you and giving a tough it might be
streamed online to perhaps a million
more but the physical sensations I'm
experiencing right now are actually
results of a much more basic mind-body
mechanism my nervous system is sending a
flood of hormones like cortisol and
adrenaline into my bloodstream it's a
very old and very necessary response
that sends blood and oxygen to the
organs and muscles that I might need to
respond quickly to a potential threat
but there's a problem with this response
and that is that it can get over
activated if I face to use kinds of
stressors on a daily basis particularly
over an extended period of time my
system can get overloaded so basically
if this response happens infrequently
super necessary for my well-being and
survival but it happens too much it can
actually make me sick there's a growing
body of research examining the
relationship between chronic stress and
illness things like heart disease and
even cancer are being shown to have a
relationship to stress that's because
over time too much activation from
stress can interfere with my body's
processes that keep me healthy now let's
imagine for a moment that I was pregnant
what might this kind of stress
particularly over the length of my
pregnancy what kind of impact might that
have on the health of my developing
fetus now you probably won't be
surprised when I tell you that this kind
of stress during pregnancy is not good
it can even cause the body to initiate
labor too early because in a basic sense
the stress communicates that the womb is
no longer a safe place for the child
stress during pregnancy is linked with
things like high blood pressure and low
infant birth weights and it can begin a
cascade of health challenges that make
births much more dangerous for both
parents and child
now of course stress in our particular
in our modern lifestyle is a somewhat
universal experience right maybe you've
never stood up to give a TED talk
but you faced a big presentation at work
a sudden job loss a big test
a heated conflict with a family member
or friend but it turns out that the kind
of stress we experience and whether
we're able to stay in a relaxed state
long enough to keep our bodies working
properly depends a lot on who we are
there's also a growing body of research
examining but showing that people who
experience more discrimination are more
likely to have poor health even the
threat of discrimination like worrying
you might be stopped by police while
driving your car can have can have an
impact a negative impact on your health
harvard professor dr. david williams the
person who pioneered the tools that have
proven these linkages says that the more
marginalized groups in our society
experience more discrimination and more
impacts on their health so i've been
interested in these issues for over a
decade when i became interested in
maternal health when a failed pre-med
trajectory instead sent me down a path
looking for other ways to help pregnant
people I became a doula a lay person
trained to provide support to people
during pregnancy and childbirth and
because I'm latina and a Spanish speaker
in my first volunteer doula gig at a
public hospital in North Carolina
I saw clearly how race and class
impacted the experiences of the women
that I supported if we take a look at
the statistics about the rates of
illness during pregnancy and childbirth
we see clearly the pattern outlined by
dr. Williams African American women in
particular have an entirely different
experience than white women when it
comes to whether their babies are born
healthy in certain parts of the country
particularly the deep south the race of
mother and infant deaths for black women
actually approximate those rates in
sub-saharan Africa
in those same communities the rates for
white women are near zero even
nationally black women are four times
more likely to die during pregnancy and
childbirth
than white women four times more likely
to die
they're also twice as likely for their
infants to die before the first year of
life than white infants and two to three
times more likely to give birth too
early or too skinny a sign of
insufficient development native women
are also more likely to have higher
rates of these problems than white women
as are some groups of Latinas for the
last decade as a doula turned journalist
and blogger I've been trying to raise
the alarm about just how different the
experiences of women of color but
particularly black women are when it
comes to pregnancy and births in the US
but when I tell people about these
appalling statistics
I'm usually met with an assumption that
it's about either poverty or lack of
access to care but it turns out neither
of these things tell the whole story
even middle-class black women still have
much worse outcomes than their
middle-class white counterparts the gap
actually widens among this group and
while access to care is definitely still
a problem even women of color who
received the recommended prenatal care
still suffer from these high rates and
so we come back to the past from
discrimination to stress to poor health
and it begins to paint a picture that
many people of color know to be true
racism is actually making us sick still
sound like a stretch consider this
immigrants particularly black and Latina
immigrants actually have better health
when they first arrived in the United
States but the longer they stay in this
country the worse their health becomes
people like me born in the United States
to Cuban immigrant parents are actually
more likely to have worse health than my
grandparents did it's what researchers
call the immigrant paradox and it
further illustrates there's something in
the u.s. environment that is making us
sick but here's the thing this problem
that racism is making people of color
but especially black women and baby sick
is vast I could spend all of my time
with you talking about it but I won't
because I want to make sure to tell you
about one solution and the good news is
it's a solution that isn't particularly
expensive doesn't require any fancy drug
treatments or new technologies the
solution is called the JJ way meet Jenny
Joseph she's a midwife in the Orlando
Florida area who's been serving pregnant
women for over a decade in what she
calls her easy access clinics Jenny and
her team provide prenatal care it's over
600 women per year her clients most of
whom are black Haitian and latina
deliver at the local hospital but by
providing accessible and respectful
prenatal care Jenny has achieved
something remarkable almost all of her
clients give birth to healthy full-term
babies her method is deceptively simple
Jenny says that all of her appointment's
start at the front desk every member of
her team and every moment a woman is at
her clinic is as supportive as possible
no one has turned away due to lack of
funds the JJ way is to make the finances
work no matter what the hurdles
no one is chastised for showing up late
to their appointments no one is talked
down to or belittled Jenny's waiting
room feels more like your odds living
room than a clinic she calls this space
a classroom in disguise the with it's
plush chairs arranged in a circle women
wait for their appointments in
one-on-one chats with the staff educator
or in group prenatal classes when you
find the are called back to your
appointment you're greeted by Alexis or
Trina two of Jenny's medical assistants
both are young african-american and moms
themselves their approach is casual and
friendly during one visit I observed
Trina chatted with a young soon-to-be
mom while she took her blood pressure
this latina mom was having trouble
keeping food down due to Naja as Trina
deflated the blood pressure cuff she
said we'll see about changing your
prescription okay we can't have you not
eating that we is actually a really
crucial aspect of Jenny's model she sees
her staff as part of a team that along
side the woman and her
family has one goal get Monta term with
a healthy baby Jenny says that Trina and
Alexis are actually the center of her
care model and that her role as a
provider is just to support their work
Trina spends a lot of her day on her
cell phone texting with clients about
all sorts of things
one woman texted to ask if a medication
that she was prescribed at the hospital
was okay to take while pregnant the
answer was no another woman texted with
pictures of an infant born under Jenny's
care lastly when you finally are called
back to see the provider you've already
taken your own weight in the waiting
room and done your own pee test in the
bathroom this is a big departure from
the traditional medical model because it
places responsibility and information
back in the woman's hands so rather than
a medical setting where you might be
chastised for not keeping up with
provider recommendations the kind of
settings often available to low-income
women
Jenny's model is to be as supportive as
possible and that support provides a
crucial buffer to the stress of racism
and discrimination facing these women
every day but here's the best thing
about Jenny's model it's been incredibly
successful
remember those statistics I told you
that black women are more likely to give
birth too early to give birth to low
birth weight babies she even died due to
pregnant complications of pregnancy and
childbirth well the JJ way has almost
entirely eliminated those problems
starting with what Jenny calls skinny
babies she's been able to get almost all
her clients to turn with healthy chunky
babies like this one this is a infant a
baby girl born to a client of Jenny's
this past June so a similar demographic
of women in Jenny's area who gave birth
at the same hospital her clients did
were three times more likely to give
birth to a baby below a healthy weight
Jenny is making headway into what has
been seen for decades is an almost
intractable problem so some of you might
be thinking this all this one-on-one
attention that the JD way requires must
be too expensive to scale well you'd be
wrong the sense the visit with the
provider is not the
Center of Jenny's model and for good
reason those visits are expensive and in
order to maintain her model she's got to
see a lot of clients to cover costs but
Jenny doesn't have to spend a ton of
time with each woman if all the members
from her team can provide the support
information and care that her clients
need the bet the beauty of Jenny's model
is that she actually believes it can be
implemented in pretty much any
healthcare setting it's a revolution in
care just waiting to happen so these
problems I've been sharing with you are
big they come from long histories of
racism classism a society based on race
and class stratification they involve
elaborate physiological mechanisms meant
to protect us that when overstimulated
actually make us sick but if there's one
thing I've learned from my work as a
doula it's that a little bit of
unconditional support can go a really
long way history has shown that people
are incredibly resilient and while we
can't eradicate racism or the stress
that results from it overnight we might
just be able to create environments that
provide a buffer to what people of color
experience on a daily basis and during
pregnancy that buffer can be an
incredible tool for shifting the impact
of racism on generations to come thank
you
[Applause]